Webmasters develop and maintain Web sites and resources. The job may include backup of
the company Web site, updating resources, or development of new resources. Webmasters are often
involved in the design and development of the Web site. Some Webmasters monitor traffic on the site
and take steps to encourage users to visit the site. Webmasters also may work with marketing
personnel to increase site traffic and may be involved in development of Web promotions.
Technical writers prepare instruction manuals, technical reports, and other scientific or
technical documents. Most technical writers work for computer software firms, government agencies,
or research institutions. They translate technical information into easily understandable instructions or
summaries. As new technology continues to develop and expand, the need for technical writers who
can communicate technical expertise to others is expected to increase.
Network administrators manage a company’s networks. They may be responsible for design,
implementation, and maintenance of networks. Responsibilities usually include maintenance of both
hardware and software related to a company’s networks. Network administrators are typically
responsible for diagnosing and repairing problems with these networks. Some network administrators
are responsible for planning and implementation of network security as well.
Cryptographers design systems, break systems, and do research on encryption.
Responsibilities typically do not include building and maintaining the computer networks that use
cryptography; these are the duties of security engineers and network administrators. In general,
cryptographers are mathematicians who specialize in making and breaking codes. Many
cryptographers work as consultants or professors of cryptography, yet there are full-time positions
available at some large corporations or for the government.
Database administrators use database management software to determine the most efficient
ways to organize and access a company’s data. Additionally, database administrators are typically
responsible for maintaining database security and backing up the system. Database administration is a
fast-growing industry and substantial job growth is expected.
A systems analyst follows the steps described in the systems life cycle. Analysts plan and
design new systems or reorganize a company’s computer resources to best utilize them. Analysts
follow the systems life cycle through all its steps: preliminary investigation, analysis, design,
development, implementation, and maintenance.
Programmers or developers (in general) create, test, and troubleshoot programs used by
computers. Programmers also may update and repair existing programs. Most computer programmers
are employed by companies that create and sell software, but programmers also may be employed in
various other businesses. Many computer programmers work on a project basis as consultants,
meaning they are hired by a company only to complete a specific program.
Data architects oversee the design and maintenance of data across a variety of information
systems and databases. The main goal of data architects is to ensure that data in a system or database is
accurate and readily accessible. More than just administering a system, data architects must employ
knowledge and analytical skills to determine if data is being handled in the best, most efficient way
possible, and what methods can be implemented to improve existing systems. Data architects work
alongside other IT professionals in teams.
Computer technical support specialists engage in troubleshooting and problem solving, both
within a corporation and for individual clients. Computer technical support specialists draw on general
knowledge of computer systems, hardware, and software, as well as knowledge of specific products, to
improve technological issues. Some individuals in this field work for technical support service
companies, while others work within corporations or agencies. Computer technical support specialists
must maintain up-to-date knowledge of current technologies and technological issues.
User interface designers work to ensure that software functions smoothly and logically for
users and consumers.
User interface designers operate within a software development team to design, create, and
troubleshoot the user interface aspects of software. User interface designers rely on technical
knowledge, familiarity with a variety of programming languages, critical thinking, and ingenuity to
ensure that the user experience for software is not hampered by a poorly designed interface.
Applications architects ensure individual software projects follow the organization’s
application development methodology and parameters. They also ensure the project fits a company’s
technology infrastructure and business strategy.
Typically, large companies employ applications architects to work with a diverse set of existing
applications that need to be integrated with numerous new application development projects. Based on
an employer’s design standards, applications architects design components of applications.
Cloud solutions architects design solutions for companies seeking to move their IT
infrastructure and services from on-premise servers to a cloud-based storage solution.
Cloud solutions architects define the cloud structure for a company and work with business
analysts to make sure the architecture is in line with business requirements. They also make sure the
cloud service provides high availability, scalability, and fault tolerance. Cloud solutions architects
manage cloud infrastructure and ensure that private and public clouds interface well.
Web developers collect or create web content and plan website layouts and navigation, as well
as coding for web pages. They also test and optimize a website for user experience and optimum
performance.
Web developers draw on expert knowledge in programming languages used for the web to
develop front-end and back-end aspects of websites and applications. They need to be highly proficient
with HTML, Javascript, and CSS, and should be familiar with server-side programming languages to
develop more complex applications. Web developers typically work in teams alongside web designers
and other IT professionals.
Information security analysts develop and implement computer security strategies and
systems to protect vital information from computer crime and cyber warfare.
Information security analysts monitor networks for security breaches and, when required,
respond to attacks with countermeasures. Information security analysts must understand the current
state of threats in the field, the needs of their employers, and current systems available for combating
threats to information security. Information security analysts also educate employees on computer
security.
Mobile application developers create applications for mobile devices, such as iPhones and
Androids.
Mobile application developers utilize multiple programming languages to optimize application
functioning on a variety of mobile platforms. Individuals in this field may find diverse project and
employment opportunities, including optimizing mobile versions of existing applications, designing
game apps, or designing functional lifestyle apps.
Front-end web development, also known as client-side development is the practice of
producing HTML, CSS and JavaScript for a website or Web Application so that a user can see and
interact with them directly. The challenge associated with front end development is that the tools and
techniques used to create the front end of a website change constantly and so the developer needs to
constantly be aware of how the field is developing.
A front-end developer architects and develops websites and applications using web
technologies (i.e., HTML, CSS, DOM, and JavaScript), which run on the Open Web Platform or act as
compilation input for non-web platform environments (i.e., React Native).
Back-end developers primarily develop and maintain the core functional logic and operations
of a software application or information system. Typically, a back-end developer has expert
programming skills in C++, C#, Java and other high-level programming languages. The key job role of
a back-end developer is to ensure that the data or services requested by the front-end system or
software are delivered through programmatic means. Back-end developers also create and maintain the
entire back-end of a system, which consists of the core application logic, databases, data
and application integration, API and other back-end processes. Moreover, a back-end developer
performs the testing and debugging of any back-end application or system.